---
title: Music library cleaning update
author: Matthew Butler
layout: post
permalink: /music-library-cleaning-update
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
After getting home from work yesterday I immediately launched back into the giant metadata cleanup project of my music library.   TuneUp is amazing but there are some things that are faster by hand.  If I just want to add one missing field to a song or album&#8217;s ID3 it&#8217;s much more efficient to just use iTunes to Select All&#8211;>Get Info&#8211;>Type in the missing value than it is to send the whole thing to a remote server for processing.  Plus, I&#8217;m paranoid about stressing the TuneUp servers too much and having it go down when I need it.  But that&#8217;s probably unfounded.

If the ID3 fields are fairly complete (say from an online database assisted CD import) but lacks album artwork, iTunes makes it really easy to add the artwork.  Just GIS the album, copy the jpeg to your clipboard, Get Info on the file or set of files, then simply paste into the artwork area.  It&#8217;s super easy and more reliable than TuneUp.

I&#8217;ve also noticed that my mp3 library is split into three main eras, The Napster Era, The Ripping Era, and the BitTorrent Era.  There&#8217;s also an IRC pre-history era that I&#8217;ll mention below.  Lest you think I&#8217;m a thieving bastard who steals all of his entertainment, I&#8217;ll have you know I also have hundreds of dollars worth of iTunes purchases and most of the CDs I&#8217;ve ripped were purchased by me.

1.  **The Napster Era. ** In the Summer of 1999 I purchased my first broadband connection and also discovered Napster.  Over the course of the next two years my music acquisition process would be radically altered forever.  For the 2nd half of that two-year period I also lived with roommates who, along with their friends, would use my computer for finding new music since I was one of only a few people then who had these tools.  Thus, scattered throughout my collection are hundreds of songs I never would have thought to look for myself.  Gansta Rap from the late 90&#8217;s?  Probably a good bet it came from this era.  The Napster era files are typified by chaotic, often non-existent metadata.  They are one-off file downloads disassociated with their original release album.  Files from the Napster era constitute about 30% of my collection and are the most challenging to work with.  They are old, obscure, messy, rife with inaccuracies, and scattered throughout the entire music directory.    They are also the most nostalgic and sentimental.  These are the files that I&#8217;m most hesitant to clean because it represents the labor of all of my friends working collaboratively to build a collection.  But like I said, it&#8217;s 2011 and it&#8217;s time for a clean library.
2.  **The Ripping Era. ** Shortly after the demise of Napster came iTunes.  iTunes made it very easy to convert your CD collection into an mp3 collection.  The database lookup tools (providing you had an internet connection) made it simple to quickly ingest an entire album with complete and accurate metadata.  Most of these files are missing album artwork, however, since providing this would have been advanced practice even late into the Ripping Era.  Other P2P networks were certainly around and used to grab single songs, but the ID3 tags were much more complete since people were using this method rather than hand-entering the information as they were previously.  It&#8217;s easy to spot files from the Ripping Era:  old albums from the 90&#8217;s and before but with surprisingly complete metadata.
3.  **The bitTorrent Era. **Or, the Modern Era.  Aside from the legal route of iTunes store, the collapse of the P2P Kazaa/Limewire/Soulseek/etc. networks has ushered in a new era of complete albums once again.  At one time I declared the album to be dead thanks to file-sharing.  After all, who&#8217;s going to go to the work of assembling entire albums when you have to wade through dozens of broken and incomplete downloads, prank files, and improperly tagged songs, when all you want are the songs you like?  Well, bitTorrent has saved the album.  We can now grab entire albums as fast as it took to get one song before and even check beforehand to make sure the files are good.  Files from the modern era are much more complete, often containing album artwork and even a completed &#8216;Album Artist&#8217; field.  You can spot these songs easily by the sheer volume of other songs by the same artist.  Only enjoy 2 George Harrison songs but have all 17 of his solo albums anyway?  Probably from the bitTorrent Era.

A note on the Pre-Historical Era.  The method for finding mp3 files before Napster was to lurk IRC channels for open FTP directories.  In many ways it&#8217;s similar to the modern era in that entire albums could be found at once but dissimilar  in that metadata was usually non-existent.  The creation date of all of my mp3 files has long-since been destroyed thanks to hard drive moves and recoveries but the earliest album I can find that is from this pre-historical era is My Bloody Valentine&#8217;s *Loveless* album.  All of the files look like this:

~onlysha.mp3  
~soon.mp3  
~whenyou.mp3

Et cetera.  There&#8217;s no metadata and they were obviously transfered originally on an MS-DOS system with an 8-character filename limit.  I probably found it on IRC sometime in 1997 or 1998.  I won&#8217;t be cleaning these files.  I want to keep them just as I found them &#8212; a reminder of a simpler by-gone era.  I have the entire *Loveless *album reconstructed (or imported I can&#8217;t remember) in its entirety in another directory, cleaned and sanitized for my finding pleasure.  These DOS files will remain as they are, like shards of pottery hinting at an earlier civilization.